LEAD: A 20-foot motorboat was reported missing and believed sunk last night in Brooklyn's Mill Basin with an undetermined number of people missing, officials said. A 20-foot motorboat was reported missing and believed sunk last night in Brooklyn's Mill Basin with an undetermined number of people missing, officials said. The vessel was reported sinking at 11:30 P.M., according to Quartermaster 1st Class Kevin Cassidy, the officer of the day at the Coast Guard station at Sandy Hook, N.J. He said the crew of another pleasure boat, sailing ahead of of the sinking craft, reported hearing screams and whistles as the craft went under. By the time the second boat turned around, the sinking boat was gone and those board could not be seen, he said. ''We are finding a lot of small debris, indicating that a wooden vessel broke up,'' Quartermaster Cassidy said. ''We've also found a life jacket and a sneaker, and we're assuming they're from the vessel.'' ''The boat was sinking as they were reporting it,'' the Coast Guard said of the vessel that reported the sinking via radio. ''They could see people waving, but they couldn't give us an idea of how many were on board, but it was more than one,'' he said. Earlier last night, New York Harbor police rescued 10 people, including two children and their 72-year-old grandmother, from the East River near Battery Park after their 25-foot pleasure boat caught fire.
LEAD: A compromise on New York City's capital budget early yesterday postponed a showdown on Mayor Koch's plan to build 17 shelters for the homeless in four of the five boroughs. A compromise on New York City's capital budget early yesterday postponed a showdown on Mayor Koch's plan to build 17 shelters for the homeless in four of the five boroughs. The fate of the Mayor's proposal, which has been challenged by many elected and community officials, is now to be decided by the Board of Estimate in the fall. Opponents of the plan in the City Council and the Board of Estimate had tried to block the shelters by diverting a $172 million appropriation for them to another part of the capital budget that would instead require that the money be used to rehabilitate apartments for the homeless in vacant or partially occupied city-owned buildings. The compromise would allow the money to be used for rehabilitation if any of the new shelters, which the city calls transitional housing, are voted down by the Board of Estimate. Mayor Koch refused to speculate yesterday on how many of the shelters would be approved eventually. But Steven Matthews, an assistant comptroller, said, ''There were strong indications that the Mayor's senior people do not believe they will get many of the shelters approved.'' Working Until 3:30 A.M.  The Council majority leader, Peter F. Vallone, said many officials recognize the need for transitional housing for the homeless. In separate sessions that ended at about 3:30 A.M., the Board of Estimate and the City Council approved the $22.7 billion operating budget they had tentatively agreed to on Monday and the separate $3.1 billion capital budget for public works. The capital budget included the $172 million allocation for the shelters. Mayor Koch stopped short of saying he had won a round in his attempts to provide temporary housing for an expanding homeless population. But if the two bodies had voted not to finance the shelters, his plan, in effect, would have been thwarted. Since he first proposed last October to build 20 shelters for 7,000 homeless people -four shelters in each borough - over a two-year period, the plan provoked debate, not only over sites but also on how best to shelter the homeless. Yesterday, in fact, as the City Planning Commission was holding a public hearing on 16 of the 17 proposed sites as part of the city's land-use review process, about 100 people from the Rockaway peninsula in Queens demonstrated outside City Hall against a shelter for homeless individuals planned for their section, Speakers on Both Sides Before the Planning Commission, the shelter program was supported by speakers from the Children's Aid Society, the Henry Street Settlement and the Salvation Army, among others. But then it came in for attack, as dozens of speakers from all over the city - local politicians, community leaders, clergymen and others - rose to urge its defeat by the Planning Commission, which has not scheduled a vote on the matter. Critics, among them Borough President David N. Dinkins of Manhattan and City Comptroller Harrison J. Goldin, have argued that it makes more sense to rehabilitate apartments as permanent homes than to build new shelters. The Koch administration has contended that new shelters are needed as transitional housing before permanent housing could be found for homeless families and individuals. Adding more shelters would allow the city to rely less on hotels as shelters for families. By next June, the city estimates, the homeless population will grow to about 6,000 families and 11,200 individuals, up from 4,800 families and 10,000 single men and women now. 'A Deferred Battle' Mayor Koch called the adoption of the capital budget item ''a deferred battle.'' Under the Mayor's plan, 13 shelters would house homeless families while 4 would be used for homeless individuals. Five shelters each are being proposed for Manhattan and the Bronx, four for Brooklyn and three for Queens. Staten Island was excluded for now after officials there reached agreement with Mr. Koch in March to allow a jail to be built there instead. The sentiment of the coming debate could be seen in one sign among the many that were carried by the people from the Rockaways: ''Not in our neighborhood. We have been dumped on enough.'' Borough President Claire Shulman of Queens has supported the Rockaways residents, arguing that the area has taken more than its share of community facilities. Even before the compromise was reached, the Board of Estimate on Tuesday afternoon awarded an $800,000 contract to Skidmore, Owings & Merrill to design a prototype family shelter. Deputy Mayor Robert Esnard said the first floor would be devoted to providing social services including counseling and recreation; the upper floors would consist of apartments with kitchens and bathrooms. Following is a list of the blocks on which the Koch administration proposes to build 17 transitional shelters for homeless families or individuals:  MANHATTAN  Clinton (families) - a block bounded by West 52d Street, 11th Avenue, West 53d Street and 10th Avenue.  Cooper Square (individuals) - a block bounded by East First Street, the Bowery, East Second Street and Second Avenue.  West 152d Street (families) - a block bounded by West 152d Street, Frederick Douglass Boulevard, West 153d Street and Macombs Place.  Milbank-Frawley (families) - a block bounded by East 119th Street, Madison Avenue, East 118th Street and Fifth Avenue.  Harlem-East Harlem (families) - a block bounded by East 126th Street, Third Avenue, East 127th Street and Second Avenue.  THE BRONX  East 138th Street (families) - a block bounded by East 138th Street, Cypress Avenue, East 139th Street and Jackson Avenue.  Commonwealth Avenue (families) - a block on the east side of Commonwealth Avenue, between Gleason and Watson Avenues.  Baychester (families) - a block bounded by Baychester Avenue, Rombouts Avenue, Givan Avenue and Co-op City Boulevard.  Powers Avenue (families) - a block bounded by Powers Avenue, East 142d Street, Jackson Avenue and East 141st Street.  Mount Eden (individuals) - a block bounded by West Mount Eden Avenue, Inwood Avenue, Goble Place and Macombs Road.  BROOKLYN  Broadway (families) - a block bounded by Broadway, Schaeffer Street, Bushwick Avenue and Decatur Street.  Neptune Avenue (families) - a block bounded by Neptune Avenue, the northerly extension of West 24th Street, Marginal Street and West 23d Street.  East New York (individuals) - a block bounded by East New York Avenue, St. John's Place, Saratoga Avenue, Eastern Parkway and Sterling Place.  East New York-Brownsville (families) - a block bounded by Linden Boulevard, Dewitt Avenue, Van Sinderen Avenue and the Long Island Rail Road tracks.  QUEENS  134th Street (families) - a block bounded by Union Turnpike, 134th Street, an extension of the northerly line of Lefferts Boulevard and the Van Wyck Expressway.  New York Boulevard (families) - a block bounded by New York Boulevard, 147th Avenue, 177th Street and 146th Drive.  Rockaway Beach (individuals) - a block bounded by Rockaway Beach Boulevard, Beach 44th Street, Beach Channel Drive and Beach 43d Street.
LEAD: A consensus is emerging among black politicians, civil-rights advocates and others that the virtual exoneration of Bernhard H. Goetz has dealt a serious blow to race relations in New York City. A consensus is emerging among black politicians, civil-rights advocates and others that the virtual exoneration of Bernhard H. Goetz has dealt a serious blow to race relations in New York City. But at the same time, random interviews with black New Yorkers found that they, like many whites, seemed divided over whether Mr. Goetz was justified in shooting four black teen-agers who he said looked like they were about to attack and rob him on a speeding subway train. ''The jury verdict was inexcusable,'' said Benjamin L. Hooks Jr., the executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. ''I think it was a terrible and grave miscarriage of justice.'' Civil Rights at Issue He added that the N.A.A.C.P. had begun looking into whether the civil rights of the youths shot by Mr. Goetz had been violated under Federal law. An earlier Federal civil-rights investigation concluded shortly after the shooting that Mr. Goetz's main motivation had been fear rather than race. Late Tuesday afternoon, the jury - 2 blacks and 10 whites - cleared Mr. Goetz of attempted-murder, assault and reckless-endangerment charges in the December 1984 shootings on a West Side IRT subway car but found him guilty of a single count of illegal possession of a gun. ''It was proven - according to his own statements - that Goetz did the shooting and went far beyond the realm of self-defense,'' Mr. Hooks said in an interview yesterday. ''There was no provocation for what he did.'' One of the victims, Darrell Cabey, was left partly paralyzed and brain-damaged by a bullet that severed his spine. A prosecution witness testified that Mr. Cabey had been shot as he sat cowering, but jurors said Tuesday night that they had rejected the account because there were too many inconsistencies in it. Like many others, Mr. Hooks said he was convinced that a double standard was at work in the Goetz case. ''If a white youth had been shot in similar circumstances by a black man while the youth was prone and defenseless,'' he asked, ''what would have been the outcome then?'' In Washington, Representative Floyd H. Flake - a Queens Democrat whose district includes Howard Beach, where a black man was killed last December when struck by a car while fleeing from a group of white youths -agreed with Mr. Hooks. ''I think that if a black had shot four whites, the cry for the death penalty would have been almost automatic,'' he said. ''You won't get that in this situation.'' In Albany, the Black and Puerto Rican Legislative Caucus called the jury's decision ''frightening,'' saying that ''it sanctions dangerous vigilante actions on the part of misguided citizens.'' The group, which includes Assemblymen Herman D. Farrell of Manhattan, Roger L. Green of Brooklyn and Arthur O. Eve of Buffalo, all Democrats, said that ''Darrell Cabey's physical paralysis and Bernhard Goetz's emotional paralysis'' are proof that leaders ''in public office and the private sector'' have failed to address social conditions that ''give rise to alienation, racial polarization and crime.'' Mr. Green, the caucus leader, said, ''We believe that the decision is going to in fact create increased tensions within our city.'' On the steps of City Hall, Dr. Roscoe C. Brown Jr., the president of Bronx Community College, told a news conference that ''the climate in which this decision was made, whether it be by white jurors or black jurors, is one of racism and fear of black young men.'' 'The Best Challenge' Dr. Brown, who also heads a group known as 100 Black Men, said, ''I submit that the best challenge we can take is to find jobs for these young men.'' The Manhattan Borough President, David N. Dinkins, said he was ''shaken and dismayed by the verdict,'' which he called ''a clear and open invitation to vigilantism.'' Even if the four teen-agers Mr. Goetz shot ''were guilty of a robbery,'' he said, ''they would not have been shot for it under our system of justice.'' ''In this country,'' he said, ''we no longer employ firing squads.'' Representative Major Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn, told the same City Hall news conference that as a result of the verdict, ''the hysteria in the white community will be, 'Yeah, we were right, let's go get 'em.' '' 'Very Anxiety-Producing' The president of the New York Urban League, Harriet R. Michel, said the Goetz verdict, ''which allows people to act with less impunity on their own personal fears, is very anxiety-producing for black people, especially for young black men.'' Mrs. Michel said young black men who were ''absolutely law-abiding now have to posture themselves every day to give off signals to let a threatened public know that they as individuals don't plan to do anything to them.'' Mrs. Michel, the mother of two teen-aged sons, recalled when one of them - who is 6 feet 4 inches tall - appeared at an Urban League dinner last month, ''resplendent in a tuxedo, people would say, 'Isn't that a lovely young middle-class black kid?' '' ''But,'' she said, ''if we put him in a Kangol hat and tennis shoes and blue jeans on a subway, because he's a self-confident kid, he could be, by his very stature, conceived of as ominous and threatening to someone. That worries me very much.'' 'Stereotyped Image' C. Vernon Mason, a lawyer who is co-counsel for Mr. Cabey, the partly paralyzed youth, in a $50 million damage suit against Mr. Goetz, said the seven-week trial had been permeated by ''a racist hysteria dealing with the stereotyped image of young black men.'' ''What we're being told by this verdict,'' he said, ''is that this society cannot guarantee and assure people of African descent life or liberty - and certainly we're being frustrated at every level in the pursuit of happiness.'' Wilbert Tatum, the editor in chief and chairman of The New York Amsterdam News, called the verdict ''a tragic miscarriage of justice, not so much in terms of the young men but in terms of the fear it has engendered in all of us.'' ''There is no question that there is now license for an open season,'' he said. Police Commissioner Benjamin Ward took issue with the view that the Goetz jury had endorsed vigilantism. ''I can assure you that no one in New York City or in this country has a license to go out and hunt anyone -black, green, yellow, whatever,'' said Mr. Ward, the first black to serve as the city's Police Commissioner. ''And nothing that came out of this case has given anyone such a license. ''If you go out and use a weapon, you will surely be arrested and put in the criminal-justice process, where it will be up to prosecutors and grand juries to determine the outcome of the case.'' Roy Innis, the national chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality and a supporter of Mr. Goetz, was critical of those black leaders who, he said, ''look to every opportunity to see racism.'' Mr. Innis insisted that the Goetz case had ''nothing to do with race, but with criminalty.'' ''And this constant confusing of racism with criminality is the most moral situation we face in the '80's,'' he said. ''These criminals and their apologists,'' he asserted, ''are a disproportionate percentage of our people.'' From Support to Anger In the South Bronx yesterday, where more than 70 percent of the population is black and Hispanic, talk and debate about the jury's verdict ranged from support of Mr. Goetz to anger that he was convicted only on the single count of weapons possession. ''I think that if I had a gun in that situation, I would have done the same thing,''said Eugene Mitchell, a 34-year-old black who lives in Claremont Village, a 30-building public housing development where the four wounded teen-agers lived. ''I'm a victim too,'' Mr. Mitchell said, taking a respite from a basketball game at the Gouverneur Morris playground at 170th Street and Third Avenue. ''I have to ride the trains late at night sometimes, and young people have approached me too. I think what Goetz did was done in self-defense. Those young guys terrorized people around here. You would not characterize them as good kids.'' Joyce Robinson, a black who has lived in Claremont Village for 18 years, saw it the same way. ''I don't see this as a racial thing,'' she said. ''Robbery is a big problem up here, where crack is everywhere. When I walk the streets at night, I carry a weapon. If it were me in the same situation as Goetz, I would have shot them too. This is self-preservation, sweetheart.'' The South Bronx and particularly Claremont Village, where 13,000 people live, has long been under siege, and more than a dozen people interviewed said justice in the courts, adequate city services and public support have eluded the area, where drugs, crime and unemployment are rampant. At a playground in Claremont Village, Johnny Hall, the public housing youth director, noted that after the Goetz verdict was announced, anger dominated the sidelines of a game between the Claremont All-Stars and younger residents. ''These kids feel hopeless, and already they are carrying weapons to protect themselves,'' Mr. Hall said. ''I'm worried about the future.''
LEAD: A crater at least 28 miles wide and 1.7 miles deep, formed by the impact of a comet or asteroid 50 million years ago, has been discovered on the sea floor 125 miles southeast of Nova Scotia, according to Canadian geologists. The discovery may help resolve a dispute over what killed the dinosaurs. A crater at least 28 miles wide and 1.7 miles deep, formed by the impact of a comet or asteroid 50 million years ago, has been discovered on the sea floor 125 miles southeast of Nova Scotia, according to Canadian geologists. The discovery may help resolve a dispute over what killed the dinosaurs. While larger craters formed by impact have been found on land, this is the first time such a scar has been discovered beneath the oceans that cover 70 percent of the Earth's surface, the geologists said. The object that crashed through hundreds of feet of water into the sea floor was probably one to two miles in diameter, the geologists said in a report in today's issue of the scientific journal Nature. The object exploded upon impact, filling the crater with debris that in some areas is more than 1,800 feet deep. The Dinosaur Controversy The sea floor rebounded to form a central mountain in the center of the crater a mile high and seven miles wide. The undersea mountain and crater are now buried beneath a deep accumulation of marine sediment, but seismic mapping with shock waves has shown the crater rim to be eroded, possibly by a violent back flow of sea water after the impact. The discovery may bear on the controversy regarding the disappearance of the dinosaurs. One theory postulates that the impact of an extraterrestrial object at the end of the Cretaceous Period 65 million years ago may have scattered debris into the atmosphere, changing the climate and causing the extinction of dinosaurs and numerous other life forms. Since no scar produced on land at that time has been found, it has been assumed the impact was oceanic. Until now, the authors said, there has been little evidence on which to assess the effects of such an impact. Now, they said, sediment laid down immediately after the event on the surrounding sea floor should provide ''a unique opportunity to investigate the effect of major extraterrestrial body impact on the marine ecosystems.'' The crater is situated on the outer continental shelf, in 370 feet of water, rather than in an ocean basin with typical depths of two or three miles. Study of the crater would not illuminate the effects of a deep-water impact. Iridium Seen as Clue The authors of the report are Lubomir F. Jansa of the Geological Survey of Canada and Georgia Pe-Piper of St. Mary's University in Halifax, Nova Scotia. Much of their evidence was derived from the Union Oil Company's report on its Montagnais I-94 exploratory well, drilled into the crest of the central mountain in 1974. That mountain and the circular depression around it were discovered, under the sea floor sediments, during seismic searches for buried oil deposits on the continental shelf. The origin of the structure has now been deduced from diverse evidence, the two geologists reported. Seismic, or shock-wave, probing of material within the crater, showing it to be strikingly uniform, combined with sampling from the well itself, indicates that the crater is filled with fragmented, thoroughly mixed, highly diverse minerals identified as ''fallback'' material. Many fragments have been altered by a violent shock. Two layers of rock deep in the crater, 233 and 115 feet thick respectively, were melted by heat from the impact. The debris is unusually rich in iridium, a metallic element found in high concentrations in meteorites. A thin layer of iridium exists in the sediment laid down at the end of the Cretaceous Period - evidence, scientists say, that an extraterrestrial object crashed into earth and scattered debris around the world. The Montagnais well penetrated three layers: 2,142 feet of marine sediment, 1,811 feet of broken rock including the two melted layers, and more than 1,300 feet of underlying basement rock. The underlying rock contains hairline cracks and other signs of being altered by a mild shock. From analysis of the extent of radioactive decay in the melt layers two laboratories have estimated that they were melted either 50 or 56 million years ago.
LEAD: A Federal district judge ruled Tuesday that the Defense Department ''abdicated its statutory responsibility'' by delaying for three years a program to open unused military structures to the homeless. A Federal district judge ruled Tuesday that the Defense Department ''abdicated its statutory responsibility'' by delaying for three years a program to open unused military structures to the homeless. The judge, Louis F. Oberdorfer, also assailed the Pentagon for spending most of the money appropriated for the program on military weapons and equipment. Judge Oberdorfer, ruling on a lawsuit against the department brought by the National Coalition for the Homeless, ordered Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and the Pentagon's military installations authorities to publish the necessary guidelines by Nov. 18. The judge termed as ''unreasonable'' the Pentagon's delay in opening unused barracks and other military buildings as shelters for the homeless, three years after Congress appropriated $8 million to pay for the program. Judge Oberdorfer noted that after the lawsuit was filed seeking action on the homeless program, and even while Government lawyers were trying to have the suit dismissed, the Defense Department finally published ''interim'' regulations last month. The judge's court order will require the department to use the interim regulations as final regulations, putting the program fully into effect, unless new guidelines are promulgated by the Nov. 18 deadline. No Explanation From Pentagon There was no immediate explanation for the department's failure to comply with the Congressional mandate. Steven Kleiman, the Pentagon official in charge of the program, was reported to be off for the afternoon. Judge Oberdorfer said in his ruling that, ''to their credit,'' Pentagon lawyers had not even ''attempted to justify their more than three-year delay in promulgating the regulations.'' According to the lawsuit, Secretary Weinberger issued a memorandum in the fall of 1983 instructing the armed forces to identify vacant space that could be made available to local government and volunteer agencies and declaring that the defense establishment should ''play a part'' in helping the homeless. No funds were authorized for the program, however. The initial appropriation of $8 million for a military shelter program, which was to include the provision of bedding, heat, light, water and transportation, became law late in 1983. Maria Foscarinis, the lawyer who argued the case for the homeless coalition, contends that successive appropriations have added $1.1 million to the military's program for the homeless. Yet, according to a Defense Department list, out of the hundreds of surplus military facilities in or near urban areas where the number of homeless people has been increasing, only eight have been made available as shelters, and two of those have since closed. Facilities in use by local programs for the homeless are at the Naval Air Station in Corpus Christi, Tex.; Kirtland Air Force Base in Albuquerque, N.M.; Fort Meade, Md., between Baltimore and Washington; Fort Belvoir, Va., south of Washington, Camp Kilmer, N.J., and a former Marine Corps garage in downtown Philadelphia. One of the plaintiffs in the lawsuit, Columbus House, which operates the only shelter in New Haven, told the court that because there were no uniform Defense Department regulations in the winter of 1985 its officials encountered such ''a maze of misinformation and contradictory determinations'' from local commanders of the different military services that it could not complete negotiations for military housing. Ms. Foscarinis, the plaintiff's lawyer, called the decision ''an important victory'' for the homeless and ''a slap in the face of this Administration's policy of ignoring its duty to the homeless.''
LEAD: After a dramatic comeback and narrow re-election victory Tuesday, Mayor Federico Pena faces a new challenge of uniting the city behind him. After a dramatic comeback and narrow re-election victory Tuesday, Mayor Federico Pena faces a new challenge of uniting the city behind him. Support for the 40-year-old Hispanic Mayor is sharply divided. The city's economy is a shambles. Key items on his first-term agenda are still in the planning stages. His ties to the minority community are strong but he has yet to forge a solid alliance with business interests that control much of this city. The Mayor seemed to sense a feeling of dissatisfaction among voters in the slenderness of his 51 percent to 49 percent victory over his Republican challenger, Don Bain. The vote ''sent a message that mistakes were made,'' he said, adding, ''But we learned from our mistakes and we'll move ourselves forward.'' The Mayor has said that he will replace some top aides who have been criticized for being out of touch with the business community. ''I have listened and we are going to address those problems,'' he said. Record Mayoral Turnout Mayor Pena, a Democrat who is of Hispanic American origin, defeated his Republican challenger, Don Bain, by just 3,026 votes of 156,322 votes cast. The official tally was 79,674 votes for Mayor Pena and 76,648 for Mr. Bain. Voter turnout was the heaviest on record for a mayoral election, with 54 percent of the registered voters going to the polls. Just two weeks before the election, Mayor Pena was trailing Mr. Bain by 22 percentage points in local polls. ''Some people counted us out and they said it couldn't be done,'' Mayor Pena told a crowd of supporters Tuesday evening. ''But they underestimated how hard you were going to work.'' Political analysts attributed the victory to a successful effort to get out the vote in Denver's black and Hispanic neighborhoods, to questions posed by Mayor Pena about his challenger's character and to Mr. Bain's political inexperience and reluctance to respond to Mayor Pena's charges. ''The comeback strategy to raise questions about Don Bain got Federico Pena back into the race,'' said Floyd Ciruli, a former State Democratic Party chairman and a strategist for the Mayor. ''After that, it got down to more of a technical matter of who could get out the vote better.'' The voting was largely along ethnic lines. Mr. Bain did well in the mostly white neighborhoods of south Denver while Mayor Pena won most of the predominantly black and Hispanic precincts in the north and east parts of the city, much as he did in the 1984 election. Good Republican Showing Mr. Bain, the first serious Republican mayoral candidate in this heavily Democratic city of about 500,000 people in more than 20 years, finished first among eight candidates in the general election in May with 42 percent of the vote. Mayor Pena was second with 37 percent. Since no candidate received 50 percent, the runoff was necessary. ''To get 49 percent of the vote is no small achievement for a Republican in this city,'' said Doug Goodyear, a spokesman for Mr. Bain. ''I just wish it had been two percent higher.'' Mr. Bain started his campaign by criticizing Mayor Pena as a weak leader unable to make tough decisions who relied too much on outside consultants. His words hit home in a city in which falling oil prices have caused unemployment and office-vacancy rates to soar and where two of the Mayor's favorite projects, a convention center and a new airport, are still only ideas stalled in disputes over sites and financing. ''I think he will have a year or so to make some changes,'' Mr. Ciruli said. ''But in general, I don't think he will be able to pull another rabbit out of his hat again. Four years from now, he will need to have a record that people can evaluate and say, 'Well, he reached his dream.' '' Bitter Personal Exchanges The last few days of the race were marked by bitter personal exchanges between the two candidates. But after the votes were counted, Mr. Bain congratuled Mayor Pena and said: ''Let's unite the city. Let's work together. Let's join hands and pull together for the benefit of Denver.'' It was the most expensive mayoral race in the city's history. Mr. Bain, a 52-year-old corporate lawyer making his first run for a major elected office, spent more than $1 million on the campaign. Mayor Pena spent about $800,000. Mayor Pena capitalized on Mr. Bain's little-known political background by asking in a series of television and radio advertisements, ''Who is Don Bain?'' and suggesting that his Republican opponent was the candidate of big business. For the most part, Mr. Bain ignored the questions; this silence hurt him, political analysts said. ''We probably didn't fill in the gaps about Don as much as we would have liked,'' Mr. Goodyear said. ''But we thought one of his best selling points was that he was an extremely successful lawyer with the largest law firm in the Rockies. But they managed to turn that against us by portraying him as a corporate Republican.''
LEAD: A group led by a New York investor, Alan B. Slifka, has purchased a 6.9 percent stake in Research-Cottrell Inc. The Somerville, N.J., construction and engineering company has received a bid of $43 a share, or $293 million, from a group that includes its chairman, Peter J. Gianacakes; Allen & Company and Odyssey Partners. A group led by a New York investor, Alan B. Slifka, has purchased a 6.9 percent stake in Research-Cottrell Inc. The Somerville, N.J., construction and engineering company has received a bid of $43 a share, or $293 million, from a group that includes its chairman, Peter J. Gianacakes; Allen & Company and Odyssey Partners. But two lawsuits have been filed in New Jersey seeking to block the buyout, arguing that the $43 price is not fair. In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Slifka group said that it had purchased 450,000 Cottrell shares for prices ranging from $43.76 to $45.06 a share for risk arbitrage and investment purposes. The group includes the New York arbitrage firm Halcyon Investments and Alan B. Slifka & Company. Research-Cottrell stock closed unchanged today, at $44.50 a share, on the New York Stock Exchange. COMPANY NEWS
LEAD: A group of employees at the Allegis Corporation yesterday announced a proposal for acquiring the company's United Airlines subsidiary. A group of employees at the Allegis Corporation yesterday announced a proposal for acquiring the company's United Airlines subsidiary. The group said that its plan, unlike a proposal by the pilots' union at United, would not add more debt to the company while providing equity to employees and a payout of $50 a share to stockholders. The group, which calls itself the Coalition Acting for the Rights of Employees and says it represents 3,000 employees, has been formed out of opposition to a takeover proposal of the pilots' union at United. About 700 supporters, including about 100 pilots, met in Denver yesterday to help work out the plan. Brian Freeman, the investment banker for the machinists' union, said the rise of the group, which has attracted some support from pilots, showed that ''there is dissension within the ranks of the pilots.'' $70-a-Share Distribution The pilots' plan called for the distribution of $70 a share, financed partly from the proceeds of selling Allegis subsidiaries of Hertz Rent-a-Car, Westin Hotels and Hilton International. Under the pilots' plan, United's debt would more than double, to about $4 billion, although the employees would end up owning 80 percent of the airline. The pilots' plan was instrumental in forcing the board of Allegis to decide to break up and sell parts of the company and to call for the resignation of Richard J. Ferris as chairman and chief executive. In the struggle for control of United, a rift has developed between two unions: the Air Line Pilots Asociation, which has about 6,000 members, and the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace workers, which has about 20,000 members. The machinists have come out in opposition to the pilots' plan, charging that it would add unnecessary debt to the airline and would not be equitable to the employees of other unions. The pilots' proposal was formulated under the guidance of the Master Executive Council at United, which governs the pilots' union; by council leaders and investment bankers. The rank and file had no knowledge of the plan until it was announced in April, and it has not been presented to them for a vote. Some advisers to the unions have said that they doubt a sale of the company could be accomplished if the pilot leaders cannot get the agreements from the other unions, including the machinists and the flight attendants. ''They won't be able to get the financing from the banks if there is a threat of labor unrest,'' said one adviser, who requested anonymity. Thus the current proposal, some advisers said, could become the basis for a compromise between the two unions. One adviser said it might be too late for such a proposal since United has been put in play by the pilots' move and some outside group could make an offer and gain control. The $50-a-share payout would come by selling Hertz and Hilton for about $1.8 billion, which would realize about $30 a share. Another $20 a share would come from the sale of Westin. After the distribution to stockholders an employee stock ownership plan would be set up, which would acquire about 50 percent of the equity of the company, estimated to be about $1.6 billion. The debt service to pay for the ESOP purchase was estimated to be about $282 million a year. The group said this could easily be serviced by contributions based on all employees' wages, which would amount to about 12 percent of total compensation. The group said that this 12 percent could be achieved through a combination of wage concessions and use of funds already set aside to finance other retirement benefits. William H. Palmer, a senior pilot at United and spokesman for the group, said that employee ownership would not go over 50 percent and that an independent board and management would be set up to run the company. Captain Palmer also had a meeting with Frank Olson, the new chairman and chief executive of Allegis. He said that the meeting was friendly and positive and that Mr. Olson wanted to have further talks in the future. COMPANY NEWS
LEAD: A House Judiciary subcommittee met today for the first of a series of hearings on modifying United States copyright law and adhering to the 1886 Bern Convention, which would increase protection for copyrighted American works. A House Judiciary subcommittee met today for the first of a series of hearings on modifying United States copyright law and adhering to the 1886 Bern Convention, which would increase protection for copyrighted American works. The House has not considered the Bern Convention since 1936. Representative Robert Kastenmeier, a Wisconsin Democrat and the subcommittee chairman, said: ''Copyright touches all Americans in their homes, schools, libraries and workplaces. It directly affects all of us who enjoy books, films, television, music video tapes and other works of art.'' The United States, the Soviet Union and China have refused to adhere to the Bern Convention, although China is also considering it. Today's hearing focused on general issues that the subcommittee will consider in detail before deciding whether to modify the copyright law to conform to the treaty. Some of the changes would prevent the alteration of a work in a way that was degrading to the artist. Mr. Kastenmeier said this change would probably not give film makers more control over the coloring of their black-and-white films. L. Ray Patterson, a law professor at the University of Georgia, testified that copyright law must serve the author, the entrepreneur or distributor and the consumer. Present United States copyright law treats the author and the entrepreneur as economic partners, he contended, and minimizes the rights of the consumer. Ralph Oman, register of copyrights and assistant librarian for Copyright Services, testified that adherence to the Bern treaty was the most important copyright issue facing the country.
LEAD: All seven Democratic Presidential candidates are expected to show up for what amounts to the first debate of the campaign, on July 1. The two-hour meeting, to be moderated by William F. Buckley Jr., the conservative commentator, and Robert S. Strauss, the former Democratic Party chairman, will take place in Houston and will be broadcast live over the Public Broadcasting System. All seven Democratic Presidential candidates are expected to show up for what amounts to the first debate of the campaign, on July 1. The two-hour meeting, to be moderated by William F. Buckley Jr., the conservative commentator, and Robert S. Strauss, the former Democratic Party chairman, will take place in Houston and will be broadcast live over the Public Broadcasting System. A Republican version is scheduled for Sept. 2. Both will essentially be expanded versions of Mr. Buckley's weekly ''Firing Line'' program. Meanwhile a prize to whoever can name all seven candidates. (Answer: former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, Senator Albert Gore Jr. of Tennessee, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois.)  WASHINGTON TALK: BRIEFING
LEAD: A man said to object to the demolition of a building to make room for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum was charged today with felony threats after barricading himself in the partly razed structure for three hours. A man said to object to the demolition of a building to make room for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum was charged today with felony threats after barricading himself in the partly razed structure for three hours. The man, Kenneth Kipperman, 40 years old, of Silver Spring, Md., is an employee of the Federal Bureau of Engraving and Printing. He ran into the construction area, which is adjacent to the bureau, with a bag he told workers contained explosives. Mr. Kipperman went to the site asking to see the construction manager and posing as an artist, a police spokesman, Capt. William White, said. According to the police, Mr. Kipperman said he was carrying explosives and jumped into an opening in the ground that Captain White described as a old chimney left exposed by the demolition. Police negotiators lowered a telephone into the hole and convinced Mr. Kipperman to surrender. He was taken to a mental hospital for observation, Captain White said. Police blocked off the streets in the area when the incident began, causing traffic snarls during the morning rush hour.
LEAD: A marine who fled the Vietnam War to Australia in 1970 and returned to the United States last week has been formally charged with desertion, the Marine Corps said today. A marine who fled the Vietnam War to Australia in 1970 and returned to the United States last week has been formally charged with desertion, the Marine Corps said today. If convicted of desertion the marine, Pvt. Douglas Beane, could be given the death penalty. But Marine officials said there had been no decision on whether to try Private Beane on the charges, and it was doubtful the maximum penalty would be sought even if he was tried. Private Beane, who spent his 40th birthday today in the brig at the Marine base in Quantico, Va., is also charged with black market violations while serving in Vietnam. He is accused of deserting in early 1970 to avoid the black marketing charges. Today's announcement gave little detail about the desertion, but it said Private Beane first fled his unit on June 9, 1969. He was arrested in Vietnam on Feb. 12, 1970, and fled again 16 days later, apparently to Australia. His Return Was Voluntary Private Beane voluntarily flew to the United States from Australia on June 9 to visit his sick father in Vermont despite an Australian court ruling that he could be not be forced to return from Australia, where he lived for 17 years. He was taken into custody by the Marines when he arrived at Los Angeles International Airport, and was flown to Washington. Defense Department officials said later that he could be court-martialed, or he could simply be ordered out of the Marine Corps. He had less than a month to serve when he left Vietnam. Private Beane, who has a wife and two children in Australia, had announced in advance that he would come home to see his father, Donald Beane, of Rochester, Vt., who has a circulatory disease. Private Beane, who is said to have lived as a nomad in Australia, applied for a visa in December to visit his father. But he was still officially an American citizen at the time, and Pentagon officials could offer no explanation on why he sought a visa. He was arrested by the Australian authorities at the request of the Defense Department, but an Australian high court ruled in April that he could stay in Australia.
LEAD: * AMC Entertainment Inc., Kansas City, Mo., a motion-picture exhibitor, said it and a private investor had agreed to buy almost 6.3 million common shares of TPI Enterprises Inc. that are held by Rank America Inc. at $6 a share. The name of the investor was not disclosed. * AMC Entertainment Inc., Kansas City, Mo., a motion-picture exhibitor, said it and a private investor had agreed to buy almost 6.3 million common shares of TPI Enterprises Inc. that are held by Rank America Inc. at $6 a share. The name of the investor was not disclosed. * Control Data Corp., Minneapolis, a provider of computer systems, services and peripheral equipment, said it would open two manufacturing plants in Singapore and would invest about $25 million over five years. * Ranks Hovis McDougall P.L.C., a British food company, said that it had acquired the National Preserve Co. of San Jose, Calif., for $26 million. * Sealed Power Co., Muskegon, Mich., said it would buy the Ramsey Piston Ring business of TRW Inc. for an undisclosed amount and expected to complete the transaction in the fiscal third quarter. * U.S. National Bank of Oregon, Portland, said it planned to acquire Western Bank of Coos Bay, Ore., the fifth-largest commercial bank in that state. Under the agreement, the almost 1.8 million outstanding common shares of Western would be exchanged for $12 apiece.
LEAD: American Olympic officials yesterday expressed concern over recent demonstrations in South Korea, where the 1988 Summer Games are scheduled to be held. They said, however, it would be inappropriate to suggest, as the Rev. Jesse Jackson did yesterday, that the threat of an American boycott would push the South Korean American Olympic officials yesterday expressed concern over recent demonstrations in South Korea, where the 1988 Summer Games are scheduled to be held. They said, however, it would be inappropriate to suggest, as the Rev. Jesse Jackson did yesterday, that the threat of an American boycott would push the South Korean Government toward political reform. George D. Miller, the U.S.O.C. executive director, said American Olympic officials were monitoring events in South Korea, where protests against the Government of President Chun Doo Hwan had spread this week from Seoul, the capital, to other cities in the country. ''We're at the watch stage right now,'' Miller said. ''Certainly, anytime there are disruptions in a country, naturally, there are levels of concern. But we're not yet at the hand-wringing stage.'' He also said that it would be ''premature'' to consider the threat of a boycott as a way to bring about political change in South Korea, where demonstrators, mostly students, have been protesting the absence of direct elections. Mr. Jackson, an undeclared candidate for the Democratic nomination for President, met Monday with the South Korean ambassador in Washington, and said that he had told him that a boycott of the Games by the United States could be used to bring about changes in South Korea. ''We're not calling for a boycott,'' Mr. Jackson said yesterday on the ABC program ''Good Morning America.'' ''Yet it is high up on the ladder of considering. Something must be done.'' Jackson Makes Appeal Jackson said he appealed to the ambassador to free political prisoners, move to an ''open, free and fair'' election and create an atmosphere that would ''justify our participation in the Olympics.'' Boycotts have disrupted the last three Summer Olympic Games. The United States and 65 other nations did not participate in the 1980 Games in Moscow because of the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. Four years later, the Soviet Union and 13 of its allies did not attend the Los Angeles Games, citing inadequate security, although it was widely believed that the actual reason was retaliation. In 1976, African nations refused to compete in the Montreal Games to protest against the inclusion of New Zealand, whose national rugby team had played against South Africa. Miller and other American Olympic officials argued that boycotts do not remedy political situations and only hurt athletes, who have trained many years to compete. ''They don't work, pure and simple,'' Anita DeFrantz, a former Olympic rower and currently one of two American members of the International Olympic Committee, said of boycotts. ''Why would we use something we know doesn't work? The people of South Korea will have to make decisions for themselves.'' As for the demonstrations, she said if they were to continue, ''they would become a concern. ''But we're still 15 months away,'' she said. ''That's several eternities, the way the world moves now.'' No Lasting Effect The other American I.O.C. member, Robert Helmick, the president of the U.S.O.C., is visiting Seoul this week, in his capacity as the president of the international swimming federation. He called the demonstrations ''serious'' but doubted they could have any lasting effect on the Olympic Games. ''Either you go forward or you cancel,'' he said, ''and that has never happened except in the case of war.''
LEAD: A military patrol has killed the brother of Bishop Kleopas Dumeni, head of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in South-West Africa, the disputed territory ruled by South Africa in defiance of the United Nations. A military patrol has killed the brother of Bishop Kleopas Dumeni, head of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in South-West Africa, the disputed territory ruled by South Africa in defiance of the United Nations. Bishop Dumeni is one of the most respected church figures in the territory, which is also known as Namibia. Maj. Stephanus Krige, a spokesman for the South-West African Territorial Force, said Joseph Dumeni was shot last weekend by soldiers waiting to ambush guerrillas of the South-West African People's Organization.
LEAD: A new $1.95 billion aid package for Argentina gained fresh momentum yesterday as bankers sought to take advantage of a provision giving them extra interest if they agreed to contribute to the new loans early. A new $1.95 billion aid package for Argentina gained fresh momentum yesterday as bankers sought to take advantage of a provision giving them extra interest if they agreed to contribute to the new loans early. The number of banks that has signed up for the package so far could not be determined, but banking experts indicated that the figure represented close to 75 percent of those necessary to finance the loan. Thus, it appeared that the 350 banks involved with Argentine loans would not meet their self-imposed deadline of having upward of 90 percent of the banks signed up by yesterday. That, in turn, would technically place in question some $2 billion in new loans that Argentina expected from the International Monetary Fund, since the I.M.F. said its financing was contingent upon a ''critical mass'' of the banks agreeing to their portion of the new-money deal by yesterday. But an I.M.F. official, who requested anonymity, indicated that in all likelihood the $2 billion was not in jeopardy. ''It was a target date, but sometimes target dates are allowed to slip,'' the official said. 'Early Bird Special' As of last Friday, according to international banking experts, the Argentine package was failing to muster support. But they said that declarations of willingness to participate began coming into the offices of Citicorp, Argentina's lead creditor, on Monday and Tuesday as bankers sought to take advantage of the ''early bird special.'' This provision allows a bank to earn an extra fee of 3/8 of a percentage point for its contribution to the Argentine package if it signed up by yesterday. The fact that some 25 percent of the banks had not signed up suggested that a number of small and regional United States banks were balking. These banks have recently established huge reserves for losses on their Latin loan portfolios, so they apparently do not see how they can justify to shareholders new loans to third world nations such as Argentina. ''A lot of smaller banks may take the attitude, 'We shouldn't have gotten involved in the first place, so let's get out now,' '' said Clarke W. Miller, a senior international banker at the Bank of Boston. ''The banks have got to find a way to differentiate the old money from the new,'' said a senior international banker who asked not to be named. This banker predicted that the $1.95 billion package would be fully financed. But he conceded that assembling the necessary number of banks would take time, just as it took the international banks months to build support for a recent loan package for Mexico. Financing for Chile Separately, Chile began formal signing ceremonies yesterday with its more than 400 foreign banks on a financing package for 1987 and 1988. With the amendment of earlier restructuring accords, of new-money agreements and of World Bank co-financing packages, the 1987-88 financing package would allow Chile to continue without new bank money in those years. It was the first time since the debt crisis began that all of a nation's bank creditors had agreed to a new financing package by the time of the signing ceremony.
LEAD: An overflow crowd of colleagues, friends and fans filled the Neil Simon Theater yesterday to bid farewell to Geraldine Page. The actress, who died Saturday of a heart attack at the age of 62, had been playing Mme. Arcati in a revival of ''Blithe Spirit'' at the house. An overflow crowd of colleagues, friends and fans filled the Neil Simon Theater yesterday to bid farewell to Geraldine Page. The actress, who died Saturday of a heart attack at the age of 62, had been playing Mme. Arcati in a revival of ''Blithe Spirit'' at the house. Noting the size of the audience, Miss Page's husband, Rip Torn, said, ''Yeah, Gerry'd like this.'' Instantly, the assembly leapt to its feet and exploded in an ovation. When the applause subsided, Mr. Torn, his lower lip quivering, talked of Miss Page's prodigious work and closed with the salutation, ''Mi corazon, mi alma, mi esposa'' (''My heart, my soul, my wife''). Anne Jackson, who appeared with Miss Page in ''Slightly Delayed,'' a 1979 play that did not make it to New York, recalled Miss Page's known love for stage business and for using props - the more, the better. ''She was a mystery to me then, she's a mystery to me now,'' Miss Jackson mused. ''She used a stage like no one else I'd ever seen. It was like playing tennis with someone who had 26 arms.'' James Earl Jones recalled a confidence Miss Page had shared: '' 'I don't know what I'm doing,' she said. 'I don't know what actors do. Do you?' '' An answer of sorts was supplied by Amanda Plummer, who said, ''The best thing that could have happened to me in my young life was to have worked with Geraldine in four plays.'' One thing actors do is teach other actors, and Miss Page's work as a teacher was a theme that recurred as often as the recollections of her performances. Anthony Torn described what it was like to be in his mother's class, where he was treated no differently from anyone else except for the fact that she reminded him to tie his shoelaces. 'I Think of Love' Viveca Lindfors moved the gathering when she proclaimed about Miss Page: ''She always knew that the truth was the simplest. I want to be the woman she was; when I think of her, I think of love.'' Miss Lindfors was followed by F. Murray Abraham, who presented the best-actress Oscar last year, which Miss Page won for her performance in ''The Trip to Bountiful.'' He was nervous, he said, because ''I had told her I was going to announce her name no matter what was on the paper.'' Horton Foote, the author of that movie, added simply, ''She was a treasure to all of us.'' Perhaps the most intriguing memory was offered by Clark Middleton, an actor who worked with Miss Page at the Mirror Repertory Company, the Off Off Broadway group of which she was both charter member and resident artist. He described walking through Times Square with Miss Page and, at her cajoling, staring skyward at the outset of a snowfall, to feel the snowflakes on his eyes. Tributes and stories also were offered by the actors David Brooks, Richard Chamberlain, Anne Meara, Lee Richardson, Sissy Spacek, Jerry Stiller and Cicely Tyson; by Sabra Jones, artistic director of the Mirror company; Michael Heller, a photographer; Dee Henock, a family friend; Karl Allison, a producer of ''Blithe Spirit,'' and by Miss Page's other children, Angelica Torn-Burkhardt and Jonathan and Danae Torn. Mr. Torn ended the tribute by telling the audience, ''We never stopped being lovers, and we never will.''
LEAD: A Palestinian editor has announced plans to run for office in Jerusalem's municipal elections next year. A Palestinian editor has announced plans to run for office in Jerusalem's municipal elections next year. The Palestine Liberation Organization has condemned the idea, prompting the editor, Hanna S. Siniora, to re-evaluate his plans. But the proposal has forced Israelis to confront a major issue arising from 20 years of territorial occupation - the increasing demands of a rapidly expanding Arab population for full democratic rights. Mr. Siniora, a 49-year-old Christian who is an avowed supporter of the P.L.O.'s mainstream faction, Al Fatah, has the potential to control at least one-fourth of the City Council if he takes all the city's Arab vote. In the past, however, most of the 130,000 Arab residents of Jerusalem have refrained from voting in municipal elections in order to protest Israeli rule. 'Real People, Not Ghosts' ''I want to show that Jerusalem is inhabited by real people, not ghosts,'' Mr. Siniora said in an interview at the offices of his small East Jerusalem paper, Al Fajr. ''The Israelis have to know there are two peoples living in this city.'' Sitting at his desk, beneath a painting of bright red wildflowers that have been marked ''Censored'' with the Israeli military censorship stamp, he said, ''The only way to resolve the Jerusalem issue is to give both peoples who reside in it sovereign rights, each on his own side of the city, while municipal affairs can continue to be run jointly.'' Only 12,500 of the 70,000 eligible Arab voters, a bloc that is about one-quarter of the city's 297,000 eligible voters, took part in the last city elections, city officials said. Israeli reactions to Mr. Siniora's announcement have varied. Teddy Kollek, the longtime Mayor of Jerusalem, welcomed Arab participation in municipal government, but right-wing hard-liners said it was perhaps time to reconsider the right of Jerusalem Arabs to vote. Commentators on the left of the political spectrum praised Mr. Siniora's idea as a jolt to Israelis who have ignored the so-called demographic threat posed by the military occupation of territory in which 1.3 million Palestinians live. ''Hanna Siniora's idea,'' Danny Rubinstein wrote in the newspaper Davar, ''is saying to us, the Israelis: 'You want to swallow us, please! But you will choke with us.' '' Publisher Isn't Pleased Meanwhile, most Palestinians, including the publisher of Mr. Siniora's paper, Paul Ajilouny, have criticized the idea. To run for municipal elections, they say, is to recognize, accept and legitimize Israeli rule over Jerusalem. The Palestinian movement, they assert, is not about sewers, but about national sovereignty. The Palestinian weekly Al Awdah said in an editorial that since 1967 ''the Palestinian people have been fighting with all possible means to achieve their national goal of establishing the independent Palestinian state.'' It added, ''Such a move by Siniora is a serious mistake as far as principle and timing are concerned.'' Mr. Siniora, an advocate of a Palestinian homeland, said last week that he would consult with international legal experts to see how his candidacy would affect the sovereignty issue before deciding whether to pursue it further. He has firmly stated that he is not accepting the Israeli annexation of the city. Jerusalem Mayor Likes the Idea Mayor Elias Freij of Bethlehem is one Mr. Siniora's few Palestinian supporters. ''It's a very brilliant idea,'' he said. ''It will not affect the political future of Jerusalem, because sovereignty does not come through City Hall. But it has reminded the world there are Arabs living in Jerusalem.'' Mr. Siniora, a pharmacist by training, has been editor of the Arabic-language Al Fajr since 1974, and he started an English version of the paper in 1980. Al Fajr is one of the smaller East Jerusalem newspapers, with a circulation of 9,000 to 12,000. The numbers are misleading, its editor says, because one newspaper ''can be read by an entire village.'' Mr. Siniora received both Israeli and P.L.O. approval two years ago to take part in a proposed Jordanian-Palestinian delegation to peace talks. He said he was prompted to explore his election initiative when the hard-line Likud bloc of the Israeli Government deferred Foreign Minister Shimon Peres's idea of an international Middle East peace conference. ''I think that to find peace,'' he said, ''we must first find it in Jerusalem.''
LEAD: A plan to help the elderly and disabled pay for prescription drugs is heading toward a compromise that its supporters say will win enough House support to override any veto by President Reagan. A plan to help the elderly and disabled pay for prescription drugs is heading toward a compromise that its supporters say will win enough House support to override any veto by President Reagan. ''There was tremendous pressure from the seniors groups to add this benefit, but also willingness to accept the costs,'' Representative Fortney H. (Pete) Stark, Democrat of California, said Tuesday after a health subcommittee of the Ways and Means Committee adopted a plan for Medicare to pay 80 percent of any drug costs over $800 a year. ''I would be surprised if the President would sustain a veto of a bill that expands benefits under Medicare and is budget-neutral,'' he added. Increases Tied to Income The plan, adopted 7 to 4, would be paid for with a premium increase tied to the income of the beneficiary. If costs exceeded revenue by $1 billion, the Secretary of Health and Human Services would recommend measures to Congress for controlling the cost. Mr. Stark said the Ways and Means Committee would probably negotiate an agreement with the Energy and Commerce Committee, which is considering a separate plan. Under its version, also financed by higher premiums, Medicare would pay the entire cost of drugs after a $400 deductible. The Democratic leadership has asked that a drug benefit plan be offered as an amendment to an insurance measure aimed at easing the cost of catastrophic illness for the nation's 30 million Medicare beneficiaries. While the bill on catastrophic illness bill has bipartisan support, the drug program does not. 'Vehicle for Modifications' The Secretary of Health and Human Services, Dr. Otis R. Bowen, has said he would recommend a veto of the health bill if it contained the drug benefit or another section requiring states to help pay Medicare premiums for low-income people not poor enough to qualify for Medicaid. In a letter Monday to Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, Dr. Bowen said the legislation had become ''a vehicle for modifications and add-ons to the basic Medicare program.'' He argued that it would lead to a $10 billion revenue shortage by the year 2000, even without the drug benefits contemplated by the two committees. Mr. Dingell heads the Energy and Commerce Committee. Major provisions of the House bill would limit out-of-pocket doctor payments for catastrophic illness to $1,043 per beneficiary in 1989 and provide Medicare coverage of unlimited days in the hospital. Coverage of skilled nursing and hospice care also would be expanded. An extra premium pegged to income would finance the new services. Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, chairman of the Energy and Commerce health subcommittee, said it would add $3.60 a month to an individual's premium while the health and human services agency said it would add $22 a month. Discrepancy on First Year Cost The agency put the overall first-year cost at $9 billion, while the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimated it at slightly over $1 billion, committee members indicated. In contrast, the budget office projects the cost of the presecription drug plan at $835 million in its first full year. Mr. Stark said the premium increase would be $1.80 per month plus another chunk based on income. No further details were immediately available. Several members of the Energy and Commerce panel, most of them Republican, criticized the expense of a series of amendments adopted by Mr. Waxman's subcommittee. ''It is costly to the elderly and costly to the Federal government, jeopardizing the long-term solvency of the Medicare program,'' said Representative Edward R. Madigan, of Illinois, the senior Republican on the health panel.
LEAD: ARCO said it is considering selling a stake of up to 20 percent in its chemical subsidiary to the public. ARCO said it is considering selling a stake of up to 20 percent in its chemical subsidiary to the public. The oil company said that its management was still studying the plan and that it had not been considered by the board. ARCO Chemical had after-tax profits last year of $70 million on sales of $1.9 billion. The company makes and sells intermediate and specialty chemicals. ARCO said it would retain its full stake in its Lyondell Petrochemical Company unit, which makes commodity chemcials. Last year, ARCO Chemical sold three businesses and expanded two others. Two years ago, ARCO undertook a broad restructuring, including the repurchase of $4 billion in stock and the sale of its refineries. ARCO's stock gained $1.375 a share today, to $93.875, on the New York Stock Exchange. COMPANY NEWS
LEAD: A retired C.I.A. official is expected to tell Congress next week of a financial link between Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, a key figure in the Iran-contra affair, and Edwin P. Wilson, the renegade C.I.A. agent convicted of smuggling arms to Libya, according to Congressional investigators. A retired C.I.A. official is expected to tell Congress next week of a financial link between Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, a key figure in the Iran-contra affair, and Edwin P. Wilson, the renegade C.I.A. agent convicted of smuggling arms to Libya, according to Congressional investigators. In addition, the investigators said, several Defense Department employees will testify that some senior Pentagon officials, apparently including Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, knew about the secret arms sales to Iran in 1985 well before President Reagan approved them in a Presidential ''finding'' in January 1986. Mr. Weinberger has insisted that he did not know anything about the transfer of American-made TOW antitank and Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Teheran until President Reagan secretly authorized them in early 1986. Arms Network Said to Continue The testimony by the Pentagon employees and the former C.I.A. official, Glenn Robinette, is to come when the Congressional committes investigating the Iran-contra affair resume their hearings. He will indicate that though Mr. Wilson has been under arrest since 1982, a network of former C.I.A. agents and military officers he helped establish to sell American arms abroad has continued, the investigators say. In fact, according to investigators, Mr. Wilson's ring formed much of the structure for the private foreign policy, selling weapons to Iran and providing money to the contras, that was run out of the White House by Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North. The chairmen of the Congressional committees said today that Colonel North had refused to submit to private questioning by staff lawyers in preparation for his public testimony before the panels.  [ Page A11. ]  The Congressional investigators said that Mr. Robinette would provide evidence ''directly connecting'' General Secord to Mr. Wilson. The new evidence is believed to grow out of Mr. Wilson's role in providing the start up capital for a company called the Egyptian-American Transport and Services Corporation. Mr. Wilson, a former C.I.A. officer who is serving a 52-year prison sentence, has asserted that he provided the money for the company, known as Eatsco, and that General Secord was one of his silent partners. Eatsco pleaded guilty in 1984 to overcharging the Pentagon by $8 million for delivering arms to Egypt. In his testimony to the committees six weeks ago, General Secord denied he had any connection to Mr. Wilson, and he has repeatedly contended that he was not involved in Eatsco. The company was headed by another former C.I.A. official, Thomas G. Clines, who later acted as one of General Secord's partners in the covert arms sales to Iran. Reinforcing a Pattern Mr. Robinette's new evidence linking General Secord to Mr. Wilson would reinforce the pattern that has emerged in the last few weeks of hearings. The pattern suggests that General Secord took part in the Iran-contra affair for financial gain, not the reasons of patriotism that he asserted during his Congressional appearance. Mr. Robinette was a career employee in the technical services division of the C.I.A., where he worked with Frank Terpil, the investigators say. After leaving the C.I.A., Mr. Terpil became a business associate of Mr. Wilson and was indicted with him for smuggling weapons to Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader. In a complex web, Mr. Terpil also worked for Albert Hakim, the Iranian-born businessman who served as the financial manager of the Iran-contra arms sales with General Secord. Mr. Terpil is currently a fugitive from justice, and his whereabouts are not known. Mr. Robinette has told reporters that he paid a contractor $2,000 to install a sophisticated electronic security fence around Colonel North's house in suburban Virginia. According to a report in The Washington Post, General Secord gave Mr. Robinette the money for the fence from a secret Swiss bank account established for him by Mr. Hakim. General Secord has denied the report. In one of Mr. Wilson's trials in 1983, General Secord acknowledged that he had known him since about 1971, after being introduced to him by Mr. Clines. Peter Maas, in his book ''Manhunt,'' asserts that Mr. Wilson also helped General Secord financially, buying a house from him in Virginia that had become a bad investment and letting General Secord use his private airplane. General Secord retired prematurely from the Air Force in 1983 after an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation into Eatsco. Mr. Wilson asserted that he provided $500,000 that was used to start the company and that General Secord, who at the time was Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Middle East, was one his silent partners. General Secord was never officially charged in the case, but he felt it clouded his career and left the Air Force to join Mr. Hakim in business. The committees are interested in Mr. Robinette's testimony because they believe it could confirm some of Mr. Wilson's charges without having to call Mr. Wilson as a witness.
LEAD: A series of miscues by the White House, ranging from the Venice summit to Middle East policy, is prompting acerbic criticism of Howard H. Baker Jr., the new White House chief of staff. A series of miscues by the White House, ranging from the Venice summit to Middle East policy, is prompting acerbic criticism of Howard H. Baker Jr., the new White House chief of staff. Among the more serious recent White House lapses is last week's gaffe over the proposed sale of Maverick missiles to Saudi Arabia, in which a plan was sent to Capitol Hill in the middle of the controversy over United States military involvement in the Persian Gulf, then quickly withdrawn in embarrassment. Latitude for Staff Chiefs The rising chorus of criticism over Mr. Baker's stewardship comes from Administration officials who have served under his two predecessors in President Reagan's White House, Donald T. Regan and James A. Baker 3d. All three have exercised unusual control over policy matters under Mr. Reagan, who affords his subordinates a wide degree of latitude in managing day-to-day business. Even his critics acknowledge that Howard Baker is handicapped by his association with a President caught up in the Iran-contra affair. In addition, some of Mr. Reagan's personal performances, including the lackluster manner in which he delivered a speech to the nation Monday night, have generated new questions about the 76-year-old President's stamina. The new staff that came to the White House with Mr. Baker is also being held responsible by some White House officials for the impression that President Reagan's performance was inadequate at the economic summit in Venice. While the recent failures have been both major and minor, they are especially puzzling because Mr. Baker assumed the post four months ago amid high expectations for success. Unlike Mr. Regan, Mr. Baker was widely regarded as knowledgeable in such areas as public relations and particularly in dealing with Congress, where he served as Senate majority leader. Officials raising doubts about Mr. Baker's performance so far question his effectiveness in handling issues like the summit conference and in shaping the Reagan agenda for the future. Defensiveness Among Aides In the latest example of uncertain stewardship of Administration policy, the White House today publicly rebuked Justice Department officials for failing to follow instructions and delete language in a letter to Congress on whether the President would support an extension of the law authorizing the appointment of special prosecutors. Marlin Fitzwater, Mr. Reagan's spokesman, said that the White House had instructed the Justice Department to excise language it regarded as ''contentious and intemperate'' but that the request had not been followed. ''I can't say why it wasn't,'' Mr. Fitzwater said. Mr. Reagan and his top aides have been openly defensive about the President's performance last week at the economic summit of the seven leading industrial democracies. But some officials argue that such a posture would have been unnecessary had Mr. Baker not predicted on the eve of the meeting that ''there will be significant accomplishments.'' Mr. Baker's optimism was contrary to both the pre-summit predictions of senior officials in the White House and at the State Department and the impressions that aides were presenting in private preparatory sessions before the conference, one participant said. A Clash With Shultz ''It's tough to do a summit where you have a caretaker Government headed by a caretaker individual and expect results,'' the participant said. ''There was no reason to give a false sense of hope.'' Mr. Baker's inexperience at summitry also contributed to what several aides cited as failures at the summit. On the eve of the meeting, he surprised some senior aides by issuing a harsh warning to Iran against installing missiles that could be used to attack American ships in the Persian Gulf. While officials said that he reflected the President's position, the timing of the comments deflected attention from the summit meeting. In addition, Mr. Baker caused concern when he suggested that the Soviet Union might play a favorable role in the Persian Gulf, a view that Secretary of State George P. Shultz later contradicted. Similarly, the chief of staff disputed assertions by Frank C. Carlucci, the national security adviser, that China was selling missiles to Iran, forcing the White House to later issue a correction that supported Mr. Carlucci's view. ''Everyone in the White House has to learn about the fragility of language,'' a senior aide said. ''There is a big difference in what you say as a chief of staff and what you say in Congress.'' Defenders Dispute Impact But officials said that Mr. Baker does not bear all the responsibility for the current difficulties. On the sale of the Maverick missiles, for example, he had wanted the Pentagon to notify Congress on an informal basis of the pending move. However, the actual notification was made formally and prompted an instant Congressional backlash, one aide said. Mr. Baker's defenders do not dispute critics, but they deny that the events have damaged the President significantly. ''I don't think when people say we are not as strong as we were, it's a statement of fact,'' said Tom Griscom, the White House communications director. In the view of some aides, however, the White House staff made other mistakes related to the trip to Europe, including having the President come to Venice five days before the summit meeting opened, without much to do until it began. Carlucci Is Criticized While most of the attention has focused on Mr. Baker, who has had a public role as chief of staff, some aides are also critical of Mr. Carlucci, the national security adviser. For example, at Venice, Mr. Carlucci predicted that the summit leaders would issue a statement of support for the Administration's negotiating position on talks with Moscow to eliminate medium range nuclear missiles. They did not. Mr. Baker and the White House staff have begun a flurry of activites to correct an impression that Mr. Reagan's leadership has been weakened, built largely around an attempt to have him appear on television and on Capitol Hill to promote his budget priorities and budget reform. White House officials hope to wrap the budget issue around a larger theme: the future of the country's fiscal policy under the Republican Party versus the Democratic Party, an issue that internal polls show as important in the 1988 campaign.
LEAD: Associated Book Publishers P.L.C., the British publishing house, agreed to be acquired by the International Thomson Organization for about $:210 million, or $342 million. The successful cash offer of 730 pence, or $11.89, a share from the Canadian media concern, ends two weeks of speculation about the future of Associated Associated Book Publishers P.L.C., the British publishing house, agreed to be acquired by the International Thomson Organization for about $:210 million, or $342 million. The successful cash offer of 730 pence, or $11.89, a share from the Canadian media concern, ends two weeks of speculation about the future of Associated Book. The Thomson offer is nearly 170 percent higher than the price at which Associated Book's shares were trading on June 2, the day before the company said it might be acquired. COMPANY NEWS
LEAD: A third voice has joined the debate about the chances of college-educated women getting married, offering the observation that the most important factor is probably the desire of the individual. A third voice has joined the debate about the chances of college-educated women getting married, offering the observation that the most important factor is probably the desire of the individual. ''Your intentions may make all the difference in the world,'' said Thomas Exter, senior editor of American Demographics magazine, in an article analyzing the debate over marriage prospects. The issue surfaced last year after a study by researchers at Harvard and Yale indicated that women 40 years old and older had only 1 chance in 100 of marrying. The Census Bureau responded with a study released earlier this year, which concluded that about 1 woman in 5 could expect to marry after the age of 40. ''If you are unmarried but still want to marry, your chances are probably closer to the Census Bureau figures,'' Mr. Exter said in the June edition of the magazine. ''If you are not sure you want to marry, then your chances are probably closer to those of the Harvard-Yale study.''
LEAD: A three-judge Appellate Court panel said today that it would rule on the state's plan to move 15,000 drums of radium-contaminated soil from northern New Jersey to Jackson Township. A three-judge Appellate Court panel said today that it would rule on the state's plan to move 15,000 drums of radium-contaminated soil from northern New Jersey to Jackson Township. In taking up the case, the panel barred the State Department of Environmental Protection from preparing the Jackson Township site, in the Colliers Mills wildlife refuge, or shipping any materials there. The attorney for Montclair, one of two towns where the contaminated soil is now stored, said he would try to have the State Supreme Court take up the case as soon as possible. With the parties given six weeks to file briefs and six more weeks for a trial and a decision, said the attorney, Timothy S. Haley, ''there's no way they can get those barrels out and the people back in their homes before next spring.'' #5,000 Drums on Lawns About 5,000 drums of contaminated soil are stored on the lawns of four homes in Montclair, and about 10,000 drums are in a section of Kearny. A Superior Court judge in Essex County had ordered the Environmental Protection Department to begin removing the drums from Montclair on June 15, the same day that a judge in Ocean County was to hear arguments on the suitability of the site in Jackson Township. In Hudson County a judge had ordered that a suit filed by Kearny, asking for removal of the drums from that municipality, be consolidated with the cases in Essex. The radium in the soil is believed to have come from a factory that used radium on watch faces; the soil later was used as fill on a site where houses were built. Radium can give off radon, a colorless, odorless radioactive gas that can be drawn into closed houses because of differences in air pressure. High exposure to radon is believed to cause lung cancer. Private Offer Received Later, at a news conference here, Mayor Laurence Olive of Montclair announced what he called a ''reasonable'' proposal by a private company to deal with the radium-contaminated soil. John J. Chando, president of the company, TFC Nuclear Associates of Moorestown, said his company and others could remove the drums of contaminated soil, process them and take them to a licensed disposal facility. He said that the cost of removing the drums from Montclair would be almost $2 million and that removing, processing and disposing of all 15,000 drums would be ''less than $20 million.'' James Staples, a spokesman for the Environmental Protection Department, said that the agency had been considering the TFC proposal but that requests for proof of ability to perform the job had not been answered.
LEAD: At least 29 soldiers have been killed in an ambush on a military convoy in southern Colombia in the worst attack since a truce was signed with leftist guerrillas three years ago, the Defense Ministry said today. At least 29 soldiers have been killed in an ambush on a military convoy in southern Colombia in the worst attack since a truce was signed with leftist guerrillas three years ago, the Defense Ministry said today. The attack, which left 30 soldiers wounded and 10 unaccounted for, took place Tuesday night in a remote area near the town of Puerto Rico in Caqueta province. Dynamite charges placed on the dirt road between Puerto Rico and San Vicente del Caguan blew up two army trucks carrying about 70 soldiers who had been sent there to do road work.
LEAD: A yearlong inquiry into corruption in the United States Customs Service has uncovered bribes to some inspectors who closed their eyes to drug smuggling. A yearlong inquiry into corruption in the United States Customs Service has uncovered bribes to some inspectors who closed their eyes to drug smuggling. The investigation has resulted in 16 criminal prosecutions of customs inspectors in a dozen cities, according to William Green, the agency's associate commissioner for internal affairs. In addition, 58 other people have been charged with corrupting agency employees. Almost all the cases involved bribery, and most were related to drug trafficking, Mr. Green said Monday, speaking from Washington in an interview with The Los Angeles Times. ''The amount of money involved, especially with drugs, is a recognized problem throughout the whole law-enforcement society,'' Mr. Green said. ''We can finally say we've addressed our problems. I don't know how many other agencies can say that.'' Problem Grows In the past, corruption problems in customs centered on officers at seaports and airports who accepted payoffs to reduce duties or admit contraband. But with the growing drug trade, more customs officers have been recruited to aid drug smugglers not only by ignoring illicit shipments but also by compromising inquiries or actively assisting smuggling operations. The campaign was started after Customs Commissioner William Von Raab charged in May 1986 that ''ingrained corruption'' in Mexico's criminal justice system hampered American efforts to stop drug activities. About 35 investigators from other customs divisions were assigned to work with 15 of Mr. Green's internal affairs agents. Eight teams worked across the country, interviewing informers and co-workers of inspectors and also engaging in undercover work. Most of the cases were aimed at people who inspect material entering the country, the customs officials who, if they can be compromised, are most useful to smugglers. Like most law-enforcement agencies, Mr. Green said, the Customs Service tries to fight corruption from the moment it begins recruiting a potential agent. Pre-employment background checks are followed by extensive training in integrity and ethics and by continual investigations by internal affairs officers. Officials with the National Treasury Employees Union, which represents customs employees, said they were unaware of operation.
LEAD: Bess Myerson had three or four envelopes stuffed with cash delivered to a Manhattan brokerage firm in the early 1980's, a former chauffeur for Miss Myerson's longtime companion said last night. Bess Myerson had three or four envelopes stuffed with cash delivered to a Manhattan brokerage firm in the early 1980's, a former chauffeur for Miss Myerson's longtime companion said last night. The former chauffeur, James White, said in an interview that another chauffeur for Miss Myerson's companion, Carl A. Capasso, told him that he too had delivered cash to the brokerage firm at the direction of Miss Myerson in the early 1980's. Mr. White said that he had brought at least $10,000 on one of the occasions that he took money to the Dean Witter brokerage company at 919 Third Avenue. The cash deliveries are now the subject of a broader inquiry by Federal prosecutors into Miss Myerson's financial relationship with Mr. Capasso, who was a major sewer contractor for New York City. Miss Myerson resigned last April as the city's Cultural Affairs Commissioner. A special report to Mayor Koch, which was made public last week, asserted that Miss Myerson had improperly intervened in 1983 with Justice Hortense W. Gabel, of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, to obtain favorable rulings in Mr. Capasso's divorce dispute with his estranged wife, Nancy. Miss Myerson was named as a co-respondent in the divorce case. Report to Mayor Koch In his report to Mayor Koch, former Federal Judge Harold R. Tyler Jr. said his investigation had turned up evidence of mysterious cash deliveries by Miss Myerson to an unknown person at the building at 919 Third Avenue near 55th Street in 1983. Judge Tyler said the cash errand should be investigated by Federal or state prosecutors. Judge Tyler, in his report, noted that Mr. Capasso was known to carry large sums of cash. In a separate case, Mr. Capasso began serving a four-year Federal prison term Monday for evasion of $774,600 in corporate and personal income taxes. Mr. White, who is 39 years old, said he had worked as a chauffeur for Mr. Capasso and Mr. Capasso's company, the Nanco Contracting Corporation of Long Island City, from 1980 through 1982. Mr. White said he had testified before a Federal grand jury in Manhattan earlier this year about matters concerning Mr. Capasso and Miss Myerson. The grand jury is believed to be looking into Miss Myerson's financial dealings and her intervention in the divorce case. Manilla-Colored Envelopes Mr. White said, however, that he had not been asked by the grand jury about the cash deliveries to 919 Third Avenue and that he had not volunteered information about it to agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had questioned him earlier. An aide to Judge Tyler, Mr. White said, had asked him to appear for questioning in Judge Tyler's inquiry. But Mr. White said he had declined to do so, without stating any reason. On three or four occasions, Mr. White said, he was given sealed, Manilla-colored envelopes by Miss Myerson and told by her to bring them to the Dean Witter Office at 919 Third Avenue. The envelopes, he said, were turned over to him by Miss Myerson in her apartment on 71st Street and Fifth Avenue.
LEAD: Bill Walton, the Boston Celtics' reserve center whose career has been plagued by foot and ankle injuries, is faced with a decision whether to have a simple operation to repair a bone in his right foot or undergo a more serious operation that could sideline him for all of next season. Walton was scheduled to leave yesterday for the West Coast, where he will consult with foot specialists in San Francisco and Arizona. Bill Walton, the Boston Celtics' reserve center whose career has been plagued by foot and ankle injuries, is faced with a decision whether to have a simple operation to repair a bone in his right foot or undergo a more serious operation that could sideline him for all of next season. Walton was scheduled to leave yesterday for the West Coast, where he will consult with foot specialists in San Francisco and Arizona. . . . Robert Parish, the Celtics' center, said his home was burglarized and ransacked when the team was in Los Angeles playing for the N.B.A. championship. Parish, whose wife and son were with him in Los Angeles, told WBZ-TV of Boston that the items stolen from the house, in Weston, Mass., which included his wedding ring and three N.B.A. championship rings, were worth $15,000. SPORTS PEOPLE
LEAD: Bill Williams, the president of the United States Golf Association, suspects the 87th United States Open championship may be a repeat of the famous Opens played on The Olympic Club's Lake Course in 1955 and 1966. Bill Williams, the president of the United States Golf Association, suspects the 87th United States Open championship may be a repeat of the famous Opens played on The Olympic Club's Lake Course in 1955 and 1966. Each of those tournaments ended in an 18-hole playoff and a major upset. Jack Fleck beat Ben Hogan in 1955 and Billy Casper beat Arnold Palmer 11 years later. ''I hope you have all reserved rooms through Monday night,'' Williams said on the eve of the start of this year's tournament. No matter how long the Open lasts, the expectations are that a golfer such as Greg Norman, Seve Ballesteros, Lanny Wadkins, Hal Sutton or Scotland's Sandy Lyle will be victorious Sunday afternoon - or Monday afternoon. The Top Billing Norman may be the favorite on this 6,700-yard course because of his record in the last five major championships. He earns this top billing because he led all four of the majors after three rounds, winning the British Open, finishing second in the Masters and the P.G.A. and 12th in the Open at Shinnecock Hills. He lost this year's Masters in a playoff to Larry Mize. Norman was the loser in the Open playoff when Fuzzy Zoeller won the championship by beating him in 1984 at Winged Foot. Ballesteros, the Spaniard who finished a dejected second to J. C. Snead in last week's Manufacturers Hanover Westchester Classic, is apparently playing very well. He was smiling and joking with spectators and fellow competitiors as he played his final tune-up round today in bright sunshine and cool weather. Sutton is rated highly because he is as good an iron player as there is when his game is right. Wadkins has finished in the top 10 four times in the last five Opens and Lyle, who won the 1985 British Open, is playing well in the United States this year. He took the Tournament Players Championship, which many feel has the best field of any golf tournament year in and year out. Then there is Mize, the man who beat both Norman and Ballesteros in the Masters' playoff two months ago. Mize finished off Norman in spectacular fashion when he chipped into the cup from off the 11th green - the second hole of the playoff. Ballesteros had dropped out on No. 10, the first playoff hole. Corey Pavin, the PGA Tour's leading money winner, who has won twice this year, must also be counted as a contender since his iron play is superb under pressure. Jack Nicklaus, winner of four United States Open titles, is 47 and not given much chance. Patience Is Required Whoever wins this Open will be a man of patience with an ability to hit balls from uphill and downhill lies to tiny greens. He will also be a man who probably won't take many chances - the price of failure is too high because of the usual high Open rough, the tree-lined fairways and the hard, fast greens. P. J. Boatwright, senior executive director of the U.S.G.A. for Rules and Competitions, admitted today that three greens on the course were getting close to being ''unplayable.'' ''Seventeen, eighteen and seven may get too fast,'' Boatwright said. ''We may have to raise the mowers when cutting those greens each day and already we are only single cutting them.'' Zoeller thought the course may have the edge over the golfers this week. ''I don't foresee any place to take a chance out there,'' Zoeller said. ''You have to shoot at an area of each green, not at the pins.'' The 1984 champion added that the fairways offer such small targets that the golfers could not just pull out their drivers and slam away. ''Anytime you make players think off the tees, you got them in the bag,'' Zoeller said. Zoeller also said that getting off to a good start was a must. The first four or five holes of the course are unusually difficult opening holes, and since the course finishes with two very difficult holes, there is little way to make up for lost ground. And the tougher the golf course, the better the chance for a playoff.
